Let us say we would like to inspect what are
all the variables that are present within
the shell environment.
We have already seen that in the past so you
could use a command like printenv, and you
will see the whole bunch of stuff that is
displayed on the screen and you will see that
there is a lot of variables that are available
which are now listed for us, you could also
use the command env and that will also display
some of these.
Now, there is a slightly better way of going
about inspecting what variables are present
in the memory, that is by using a particular
command as follows echo and here what we will
do is you put the exclamation mark followed
by any character, so the character starting
with let us say so, this is a construction
to see what are the names of the variables,
it starts with H and you see that these are
the variables and each of these now you can
actually explore, the values.
So, each of them can be done and so on, so
this is a very interesting command because
it is actually giving you the names of the
variables rather than the value of the variable,
the star actually is an expansion to tell
you that the name can be anything after H,
so of course, you can also start with the
multiple characters, so you could actually
ask like this echo dollar bang, which means
give me the names of the variables, not the
value and let us say HI followed by star which
means that all those starts with the HI will
then be listed, you see that the home is not
listed, because it is HO.
So, this is a very nice way because if you
want to inspect what are the variables that
you could actually check it out.
Now, let us inspect some more features that
are available.
So, mydate is a string in a variable called
mydate, I would like to store the output from
the command date and you see that mydate is
now storing a particular string.
So, I do not want to type such a long string,
so I want to use this shortcut to actually
also illustrate certain features.
Now, let us say I want to count how many characters
are there in this particular string.
So, you see that the hash at the very beginning
is indicating that it should not print the
value of the particular variable, but the
length of the particular variable.
So, the length happens to be 38 characters,
so this is 38 characters, you could count
it off.
So, as you can see, the braces are actually
very powerful, because the very first character
tells you what to do with that.
So, the first character is bang then it actually
asks for the names of the variables if it
is hash, then it is asking for the length
of the value of the particular variable.
Now, let us say if the variable is not set,
what would come out.
So, let us see myvar something is set, so
unset myvar, now, myvar is not set, so if
I now ask for the length of that particular
variable, and now you see that it says 0,
because it is not existing, so it has 0 length.
Now, the colon within the braces is also very
powerful as we have seen earlier, where we
can take action to display something that
is useful to give us a default value, whether
the variable is present or absent.
There are two different ways to go about that.
Now, we will see some more uses of that particular
colon.
Now, I would like to illustrate how to extract
a part of a string from the value of a particular
variable.
So, for that, we take the mydate as the variable
and look at the value of the variable and
we like to extract let us say the characters
in a particular range.
So, you could do that in this fashion, so
from let us say sixth character onwards, I
would like to start and go up to it let us
say 16, so ten characters I would like to
display after that, and you see that it is
done here, so after 6 characters, it starts
to basically take up to 10.
Now, this is illustrated quite nicely if you
have a string in which you can actually count
better.
So, let us do that here, so myvar is equal
to and let us say abcdefgh12345678, so now
you will be able to relate to it quite easily.
So, echo dollar myvar and colon and now let
us say I put three colon 3 now, you see that
the first three are skipped following that
the three characters are being displayed.
Now, I would make this as four and you see
there are four characters that are displayed.
So, which means that this part is to indicate
what is the offset and this part is to indicate
how many characters have to be displayed from
the offset.
Now, you could also have the offset negative
that is offset from the right-hand side.
However, you know that minus is used for a
specific purpose already it is used to inspect
whether the variable was present or not.
So, a minus sign is to be always preceded
with a blank to indicate not to be confused
with the other operation.
So, let us do that here minus 3 colon 3, so
now you see that it is actually coming from
the right-hand side, so it has offset the
characters by three from the right-hand side
and printed three of them.
Now, if I print only two of them, you will
see that only 6 and 7 are displayed 8 is not
displayed.
Now, if I happen to ask for more characters
than they are in the string, then it would
not complain, it would print the how many
are available.
So, you could also have them as let us say
8 or 9 or something, does not matter, only
three are available after the offset and therefore
those manually are displayed.
So, you can see that if you have a string,
you can actually print portions of the string
either from the left or from the right by
taking an offset and also indicating the number
of characters after the offset.
So, if I want to extract from the date command
only the day then what do we do, echo dollar
mydate colon and we would have no offset and
the six characters and you see that the day
of the week has been displayed.
So, this is a very neat way by which you can
extract portions of the strings from the value
of a variable which is already coming from
the output of the command.
Let us say we would like to extract only the
date from the date command.
So, it can be done in two ways, so I would
like to only extract this part, let us say
only that part can be done in two ways.
So, first, I would illustrate that by using
the date command itself, so look at the manpage
for date command and you can see that certain
fields can be displayed, so you can see that
the percentd can be used for displaying the
date of the month, then percent B for the
full month name and the percent capital Y
for the year, in four digits.
So, we could do this by the date command,
so date plus and then the format so percent
d and then a blank space percent capital B
then blank space percent capital Y.
So, you can see that we have printed the date
by looking at only particular set of fields.
Now, we could also extract the fields from
the output which is already available for
whatever reason, if you want to do that, you
could also do it in this manner mydate is
equal to, so now I have stored the string
within the variable mydate and echo mydate
colon, then I would have 6 colon 16 and you
see that output is same, so which means that
you could also cut portions of your string
and print them by using the manipulation of
the value of a variable by using the colon.
So, what comes after the colon the first number
is the offset the second number is the length
of the string after the offset.
And that gives you basically the same output
as what we have achieved by using a particular
command option for the date command.
So, sometimes the options do not have the
possibilities for the manipulation that we
want and therefore learning other ways of
manipulating the string is also useful.
Now, I would like to illustrate the concept
of extracting patterns out of a string.
We will be learning about the regular expressions
and the grip shortly but we can already get
introduced to that concept by trying out some
patterns, very simple patterns, which are
very useful to inspect the file extensions.
So, I would have let us say myvar as file
name dot txt dot jpg.
So, it is a string which happens to have two
extensions for whatever reason.
So, that is a variable myvar in which the
particular string with the two extensions
are there.
Now, I would like to extract only the last
extension by a particular pattern.
So, what is the pattern?
The pattern is it is following after the dot,
so the dot is used as a placeholder and then
we can use star for unknown number of characters
to be matched and let us see what we can do
with respect to the pattern matching.
So, there are two ways of pattern matching,
whether we would like to the match pattern
to be displayed or the matched pattern to
be hidden, so both are available.
So, here we have written in a particular manner,
you can see that there is a hash which is
coming after the variable name, we have already
seen hash coming up, so if it came in front
of the variable, that is number of characters
are accounted for particular variable, so
it is coming after the name of the variable
and then there is a pattern, the pattern is
star dot, so you see what happens when you
try to echo and you see that a pattern that
is matching star dot is displayed.
Now, if you have one hash it would actually
see what is the minimum that you can match
with the star, so when the file name is matched
and then after that just stopped, but technically
file name dot txt itself can be matched as
a star dot because there is one more dot available,
so that can be achieved by asking it to maximize
the amount of matching by using double hashes.
So, this idea of double hash or double percentage
sign etcetera that we will see are used to
indicate a minimum and maximum matching.
So, you see that the extension has come out
now, this extension is not by counting number
of characters, but by using the pattern where
a dot is used as a separator.
So, how do we verify, let us do this way.
So, myvar is equal to let us say myfilename
dot somethingelse dot and then jpeg now, the
extension is four characters.
And now, if you see here jpeg is coming out
which means that we are not going by the number
of characters that are being matched, but
by a pattern and the pattern is star dot,
which means that after an unknown number of
characters so there should be a dot and that
should be matched as largely as possible by
using the double hash symbols.
So, the entire myfilename dot somethingelse
dot will be matched for the pattern that is
being displayed here and then the remaining
part is actually displayed as the output so
jpeg is coming out as an output.
So, this is quite useful to find out what
is the extension or that particular file name
that is coming into the script by ignoring
whatever is in front of the dot symbol.
Now, the opposite of it is to display what
has not been matched, so that is used done
using the percentage symbol, percentage and
now, I would like to match what is in front
and therefore, I would use the dot star as
a way to match, so dot star and you see that
whatever is in front of the dot has now been
matched and it is matching as minimal as possible,
because only this part is been removed.
Now, I would like to remove this part alone
fully so that only the stem of the file name
is shown, so for that as I mentioned earlier
double usage of that particular trigger can
be useful, so we use the symbol twice here,
then the maximum possible matching will be
done and now, you can see the only the stem
is shown myfilename, so dot somethingelse
dot jpg has been matched with the pattern
that we have put as dot star and then the
remaining part is now displayed.
So, now, you see that the use of hash as well
as a percentage sign, percentage sign is showing
you what is in front of the dot and then the
hash is showing you what is after the dot
by the way we have given the patterns.
So, now let us say I would like to make the
name of this particular variable to be such
that it is only the stem followed by the extension.
So, we could do that in this manner echo dollar
myvar percentage percentage dot star that
will give me the stem and then dollar myvar
hash hash star dot that will give me only
the extension.
And you see that we have got it as filename
jpg, and now, I would like to have a dot in
between them, so that its like a file name
dot extension and I have got that now modified.
So, you can see that we have been able to
manipulate a string myfilename dot somethingelse
dot jpg as the stem dot the extension alone,
without even worrying about how much of the
text is in between the two dots, and we have
just knocked it off and created this of course,
we can also use it to give the extension in
a different manner also.
So, for example, you could actually make it
like this and so depending upon our requirements
of the script, these kinds of manipulations
can be quite useful and these are also very
fast because these are inbuilt features for
the bash.
Now, I will illustrate how to do a pattern
matching, which is to also do the replacement.
So, earlier what we have done is to display
what has been matched or to display what has
not been matched by using the symbol hash
and percentage.
Now, we can also do a replacement of whatever
has been matched.
So, here we would actually illustrate that
and there are four different ways of doing
that.
So, what I would do is echo myvar, now pattern
matching in most of the Linux environment
always goes with a pair of forward slashes,
so that is something that we will use in GREP
when we learn about regular expressions later
on, but already we can start trying it out.
So, if you use it once, it will actually replace
it once, so what I would like to do is whenever
I have got small e I would like to make it
as a capital E let us say, small e I like
to make it as capital E.
So, you see that the display is done for the
whole variable and the first e is been replaced
with the capital E but the second e has not
been done and the third one also has not been
touched, so which means that when you use
this forward slash once it replaces only once.
Now, if you would like it to replace as many
times as it occurs, so you will put twice
of that and you see that every time the small
e has occurred it has been replaced with capital
E, so you could see that everywhere it has
been done and this difference is coming because
you have used this particular pattern matching
trigger twice, so normally the same convention
is applicable, so if we have used the trigger
once it is done once and if you have done
it twice it means it will done it will do
the matching the maximum number of times that
is possible.
So, it has been observed for all the implementations
of string manipulations as we have seen till
now.
Sometimes you may want to check whether this
pattern is matching should be done in the
beginning of the string or at the end of the
string.
So, let us do that out, let us just try that
out.
So, let us say if the file name starts with
the capital M then you should change it with
small m, so we could try that out.
Here the pattern is actually preceded with
a hash and let us say a small m, capital M,
so you see that the beginning M has been changed
to small m and nothing else has occurred.
Now, we could also check this out with respect
to E. So, you see that the capital E that
is there, is the first capital E within this
particular string, but it has not been changed
because the hash in front of capital E indicates
that you should change it only if it occurs
in the beginning of the string and therefore,
this will not affect, so what is the difference
if I were to actually not have the hash then
the first occurrence of capital E will be
changed with the m and you see that here it
has been done and this is not what we intended.
So, something like that you could actually
trigger whether it has to be matched in the
beginning or somewhere in the middle.
So, I will correct it with e so that it actually
also makes some sense in English.
Now, you could also ask the same thing to
be done at the end of the string, so echo
dollar, myvar and the past pattern I wanted
to the end so, I would put it as a percentage
symbol and if the end of the string happens
to be small g I would like to make it with
a capital G.
Now, you see that only the end of the string
has been modified to capital G, but there
is one more g here in the middle that has
not been touched.
Now, what will happen if you did not have
the percentage, you see that whatever is in
the middle has been encountered first while
parsing, so parsing is generally done from
the beginning of the string and therefore,
this G is the first one, so that has been
made into capital and the last g of the string
has not been touched.
So, you see the difference between this usage
and this usage, so if you have preceded the
pattern to be matched with a percentage sign
symbol, then it will be matching with the
end of the string, but if you did not have
it, it will be done at the first occurrence
of the string.
There are four different ways of matching
that is basically once or many times or at
the beginning of the string or at the end
of the string.
Now, it’s up to you to imagine how you can
combine these to ensure that you are basically
are able to modify the names as you like.
So, in this case, for example, I want to just
run a script which changes the string jpeg
to jpg, but I want it only if it is in the
end of the string so that it is only affecting
the file extension and not the name of the
file.
So, what I would do here is as follows, jpg
and I would like it to be only in the end,
so I put a percentage symbol there and you
see that the file extension alone has been
tampered with and everything else is present.
So, how do we verify that, let us say I will
change the name of the variable to be like
this myvar is equal to and I say myjpegfile
dot something dot jpeg.
Now, you see that I have got two occurrences
of jpeg as a string and you see here, the
first occurrence of jpeg is not touched, the
last occurrence only has been touched and
that has been changed to jpg because of the
percentage symbol.
Now, I would try what happens if I did not
do that, so you can see that here the first
occurrence of jpeg has been changed to jpg,
but the last occurrence has been ignored.
Now, I want to change everywhere for example,
I would obviously have the possibility to
use a forward slash twice and it will do everywhere
that is possible.
So, you can see jpeg is occurring twice and
in the beginning of the string as well as
at the end of the string, and both those portions
have been changed to jpg.
So, you can see that you can actually match
portions of the string and replace them or
extract or delete them.
So, you have all these possibilities, now,
by a combination of all these you can actually
go on to try what you like with respect to
those variables, how do we actually store
the output of one operation in another variable,
so that we can then go on to do further operations,
we already have the back quote for that.
So, we will do like this myvar1 is equal to
back quote eco, then we can actually have
this myvar, now echo myvar1 and you see that
now the myvar1 is contained in the output
of whatever manipulation we have done.
Now, we can actually illustrate this by extracting
the day out of the date string, so mydate
is equal to back quote date, so echo mydate
will contain the string, now I would like
to just manipulate what is the first word
Sunday, so mydate, then I have got hash star
day so that would match the Sunday and there
is nothing else that is matching with the
day there.
And you see that the Sunday alone has been
knocked off and rest of it is displayed.
So, you could actually try these kinds of
manipulations on strings, which are outputs
of other commands, so that you can achieve
the kind of pattern that you are looking for.
Now, let us say we would like to also do some
manipulations with respect to the case change,
that is the uppercase to lowercase and vice
versa.
So, those are also available and they are
very powerful because we will see that the
speed of those operations is much faster than
if you were to do by a separate program.
So, let us do that here mydate is with the
combination of capital letters as well as
small letters.
So, I would now do a manipulation, so with
a comma so I just use a comma there and you
see that only the first character has been
made to a small letter the January J is still
a capital letter and if I want the entire
string to be in a small letter, so though
I put two commas and you see that the January
also has a small j, ist also has a smaller
ist, AM also is changed to small am so, comma
or two commas basically indicate whether you
would like to have the first character to
be changed to a lower case or all the characters
to be changed to the lowercase.
The same thing can be applied in a reverse
manner for uppercase where instead of comma
you would actually have a hat, hat now this
is not going to be very useful, because Sunday
for the original string already has a capital
letter, so for that, I would use some other
variable, so myvar is equal to hello and echo
myvar hat.
So, you see that the H is now capital, so
original variable it does not have a capital
H in the beginning, now it is capital H if
I use hat.
Now, if I use double hat what happens?
So, by the same connotation, all the letters
will be changed to uppercase and you can see
that has been done.
So, this can be also applicable for the string
that we have just now tried mydate double
hat and you see the entire date string has
been converted to uppercase.
So, this is quite useful in some pattern matching
in situations where you need to work with
full capital letters or small letters as the
convention for that particular file format
may require and you can do those conversions
within no time just by adding these trailing
characters after the variable name within
the braces.
So, you can see that this construction of
a variable with the braces is very powerful,
because by having things within the braces,
there are commands that can actually operate
on the value of that particular variable.
Now, you can look at the manpage for date
and you see that there is actually no easy
manner by which I can actually have the day
of the week in a capital letter.
So, you can see that capital A is for the
week day, but it is such that the first character
is capital rest of it is small.
So, if I want Sunday to be displayed as full
caps, then it is not readily available and
these are the kinds of situations where here
you have got ability to do it by just extracting
the string and then manipulating the string.
You have seen that we have been assigning
values to variables of different types and
we are also changing the type of value for
the same variable.
So, sometimes it is alphanumeric, sometimes
it says a number and we were also able to
change the case of the string uppercase characters
or lowercase characters as we would like to
have them as, so is it possible to have the
restrictions on the variable so that the values
can be either only uppercase characters or
only lowercase characters, only a string type
of a value or only numerical value, such a
restriction is possible on the variables using
the declare command and let us explore that
now to see how to restrict the values that
can be assigned to a particular shell variable.
Now, let us look at the help for the declare
command and you see that it is not there,
so which means that it is not a manpage.
So, it may be a shell bulletin and therefore
now you see that it is available.
So, it is actually coming from the shell,
so what
type of a command is that?
So, it says it is a shell bulletin, so help
declare what are the various features that
are available.
Now, you can see that there are some options
that are there, which go in front of the name
of the variable.
So, here for example, minus a says that the
particular variable is actually an indexed
array, or it can be an associative array,
or it can be an integer, uppercase characters,
or it can have lowercase characters and so
on.
And you can actually use the plus sign to
unset that particular restriction and minus
sign to actually set it.
That is a little counterintuitive, but normally
all options come with a minus sign, so therefore,
it is used in that sense.
So, let us go and explore that declare and
then I would like to insist that numbers only
should be stored in a variable called mynum,
so mynum should only have integers.
So, mynum is equal to 10 echo mynum and you
will see that the variable is storing it correctly.
Now, I try to store a string in that and now
what happens is of course, it does not comply
upfront, but you see that it has stored 0.
So, you can see that when you try to store
a string in a variable which is designated
only to store integers then things will go
wrong and you normally get 0 if you try to
assign it.
So, now, let us do the same thing with the
other variables with other restrictions, so
the minus i restriction is for integers.
So, let us say minus l for lowercase characters,
so I will say myvar, so myvar is equal to
hello echo myvar and you see that it is able
to reproduce quite well.
Now, I would like to store something else
in that.
So, capital HELLO and you see that the capital
H has been translated to small H and the string
has not really changed its character.
So, the same string is available, so it is
not as problematic as in integers where we
actually lost that particular value and we
got a 0 as the value of the variable.
So, here that is not the problem only the
case has been adjusted to fit to what is the
declared case for the variable and that is
quite fine.
So, we could actually also see that you could
mix the cases, anywhere the string and that
would still ensure that the string is only
having lowercase characters, this is very
convenient where you are expecting for example,
all the characters to be lower cases there
is no point in trying to search for uppercase
and then replace them etcetera, you just simply
put the restriction and then assign the values
and the values will be adjusted as per the
declared case of that particular string variable.
Now, let us declare the string variable with
the uppercase characters, so for that I would
actually say myvar is my uppercase variable.
So, myvar is equal to and here I would type
HELLO echo and it will contain the uppercase
characters as we have originally assigned.
Now, if I happen to assign a small case, lower
case
and they would automatically get converted
to uppercase.
So, again, try that out
you see that the entire string has been converted
to uppercase because we have made the restriction
here to be uppercase characters.
So, these restrictions are quite useful in
doing some translations of the characters
automatically while the value has been assigned.
So, we could actually also switch off that
particular attribute.
So, I can say declare plus u so I am just
switching off the uppercase restriction for
myvar and then I would assign the string which
is having lowercase characters.
So, now I have put a plus u which means I
have removed the restriction.
So, if I echo then I would get the same string
with lower case characters so the restriction
has now been removed.
So, the same thing is possible with the other
variables that we have done so declare plus
l myvar and myvar is equal to, so it is now
accepting uppercase characters because the
restriction of lowercase has been removed
with a plus l.
it is a little different because plus l normally
means as if you are adding some attributes,
but in this case it is actually removing the
attribute of forcing the lower case characters
for that particular variable.
Now, there is another attribute which is also
to ensure that you do not change the value
of that particular variable once it is made
available to the user, that is basically the
read only attribute.
So, let us say today is equal to date, so
echo dollar today so the date is fixed.
Now, I would like to make this particular
variable today as a read only, so I will say
declare minus r today.
So, you see here I cannot now change it, so
it prevents me from changing the value of
the variable today because it is read only
so it does not get changed.
Now, I can also not change the attribute itself,
even the attribute changing also is not possible
which means that once you set a particular
variable as read only, then by and large it
is safe because you cannot change the attribute,
you cannot also change the value.
So, it is a very nice way by which if you
have a script that is passed on to a user
and you want to have some variables in the
script to be available to the user but only
as a read only feature then you can have this
attribute and then pass on and then those
variables cannot be modified by the user either
intentionally or by mistake.
Now, let us explore the concept of arrays.
There are two types of arrays, index arrays
as well as the associate arrays, but is basically
the regular arrays with an integer as the
index or a string as an index in the case
of the hashes associate arrays.
So, this is done by using the declare option,
so we will say declare minus a and then array
so arr is my array.
So, now arr happens to be an array and therefore
we can actually start assigning values to
it so arr and then the array index can be
given in the square brackets, so we would
give the first index as 0 for example.
And the equal to sign has to be given just
like any other shell variable, so no space
between the variable name and the equal to
sign.
So, those restrictions are applicable.
So, we will have the first value as Sunday
and array 1 is Monday.
So, now I would like to check what are the
variables stored in this particular array,
so we could actually inspect those now, dollar
array and then let us say 0, so it will give
you the 0th item and the first item available,
now if you happen to give any arbitrary index
and if it is not there nothing dangerous will
happen, it is just simply going to give you
a null because such a variable does not exist
and this is true for any other shell variable.
So, if you ask for any shell variable which
did not exist it does not crib much, it just
simply give you a null on the screen and moves
on.
Now, how do I know how many elements are there
in the array?
Hash array and here in the index position
I just put a symbol at to indicate all the
possible keys are to be used for that purpose
and now we get a number 2, so that means there
are two values that are stores in the array
called arr, now what are those also can be
asked, so without the hash basically the variable
itself it used, so you could then ask for
what are all those and you see that both the
values are now displayed on the screen.
You could also ask what are the indices that
are actually used.
So, we already have come across the exclamation
mark it is basically to inspect the names
of the variables so in this case being an
array the name is basically the index and
therefore that will be returned and you see
the indices that are being used are 0 and
1.
Now, why is that actually important?
If you knew the size of the array, is it not
obvious that you could just simply go up to
the size of the array, so here you have 2
which means that 0, 1 should be the two indices
that are possible, the answer is no because
you can actually have any other index also
used without actually filling up intermediate
indices, so I could actually have something
like this array of 100 is equal to, and I
can make some
random string.
Now, I can ask how many elements are there,
so it says there are three elements, so what
are the indices?
It is not 0, 1 and 2 but it is 0, 1 and 100.
You can see that the indices are 0, 1 and
100, so it very important for us to inspect
what are the indices because those indices
are not necessarily continuous.
So, this is one of fundamental difference
between the arrays in shell versus arrays
in C language or FORTRAN language etcetera
where the indices are all continuous from
0 to the size of the array.
Now, let us say you would like to delete a
particular element from the array, so in this
case I would like to delete the 100th element,
so you could do it with unset, so unset and
then array 100, so I pass on along with the
index so that the entire thing is interpreted
as if it is a variable name and that is removed,
so now I can ask how many elements are there,
there are two elements and what are those
indices, and 0 and 1.
So, the 100th elements has been removed by
using the unset command and the index which
we would like to remove is indicated with
in the square brackets as if the entire thing
is a variable name.
Now, can I append something to the array that
is used in the same syntax as in C language,
so you could have array plus is equal to and
values of the array are generally given in
parenthesis so you could have something like
this, now you could then ask how many elements
are there in the array, there are three elements
and what are those indices, 0 and 1 and 2
and what are those variables, so you could
say Sunday, Monday, Tuesday.
So, you could see that you can append a value
to array, you can insert a particular value
in the array with any arbitrary index, you
could also remove it from the particular array,
you could inspect what are all the indices
that are being used and you can also inspect
what are the values that are used in an array,
so you can see that the array concept in the
shell environment is quite rich.
So, you can also populate an array in one
go, so you could do that in this manner for
example, so array is equal to and in brackets
you could actually give the values, and now
you could ask what are those variables, so
you have got all those variables and what
are all the indices, so indices go in the
sequence.
So, if you have populated the array in one
go then the indices are sequential because
that is the most obvious thing to do in such
a situation but there is no restriction for
you to stick to it, you can actually insert
anything at any position.
There are also some situation where you would
like to have the index of an array not as
a integer but as a string, so like for example,
a roll number which is string can be then
mapped with the name of the person for example.
So, you could also declare them as associate
arrays or associative arrays or hashes.
So, let us have that as a hash, declare minus
a hash, so hash is now a name of variable
and it will contain sequence of values which
can be indexed using strings and not necessarily
using only integers, integers are also possible.
So, let us say 0 is equal to and the first
value I would let us give a name Amal hash
1 is equal to Bimal.
Now, comes the idea, this is like an array
but it’s a associative array so you can
use indices which are not necessarily integers
but also strings, so I will use a string which
looks like a roll number, so that is like
a roll number typically and now you can see
that it is accepting that and now look at
the keys that are used, so this bang or exclamation
mark tells you to inspect the name of the
arrays and in this case it say array and therefore
the indices are then extracted, the at symbols
tells you to run through the entire array,
so now you can see that the three indices
that are used are 1, 0 and mm12b001, so you
could actually mix indices to be just strings
or numbers.
So, I would actually have the strings to be
anything else new student, and you could now
see that there are four indices of course,
the space may appear as if it is 5, but you
can actually count, so let us do the counting
here, so you see there are only four of them,
and each of them we can then go on to inspect
the value and here you should give the key,
so you could give the key as let us say and
it will give you the value.
So, you can see that they keys need not be
simple strings, they can be complicated strings
with spaces in between, it could also be numbers
and you are now free to store a hash of set
of values that you would like to keep for
your work.
So, you could actually have this as a additional
feature to write scripts which can be used
to manipulate the output of a command the
way you would like to have for your scripting
usage.
So, when I type ls I have got the list of
the files there, declare minus a myfile.
So, here you have got 11 and you could inspect
what are all those indices, so it goes from
0 to 10 and what are those you could also
inspect them, so bin and then desktop, then
documents and downloads and so on.
So, you could see that there are 11 folders
in the directory that I have with the ls command,
I am getting 11 entries, and those 11 entries
are now indexed from 0 to 10 in the array
called myfiles and I can inspect each of them
one after another in this manner, so if I
have a script that runs through each of this
directory to perform some action, it is now
quite easy because I have them in array and
I can run to those arrays.
Now, to run through a array using a index
you need to have a concept of loop and that
brings us to the shells scripts in a text
mode, so we will learn that in the upcoming
classes where we will be able to write a set
of commands including the looping and conditional
statements etcetera, so we will explore that
as we go along but these basic ideas about
the variables and their values will be quite
use for us to imagine how we can accomplish
the task at hand.